docs(sbom): add SBOM generator extension documentation (#818)
open-component-model/delivery-service: docs/extensions/sbom_generator.rst

   
   .. image:: ../res/download-sbom-button.svg
      :alt: Download SBOM button

   This opens the SBoM popover, where all sub-components are grouped into three
   sections: **Ready**, **Not ready**, and **Unsupported**. 
   
   .. image:: ../res/download-sbom-popover.svg
      :alt: Download SBOM Popover

   The popover also shows the configured generation mode and output format, and displays the access type
   and artefact type for each sub-component so you can see at a glance what will
   be scanned and what will be skipped.

4. To download the SBoM for a specific **sub-component**, open the sub-component
   first, then click the ``DOWNLOAD SBOM`` button.

How can I manually request SBoMs for a given OCM component?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Open the ``DOWNLOAD SBOM`` popover for your component. Any sub-components whose
SBoM has not been generated yet will appear in the **Not ready** section. When
there are pending sub-components, a ``Trigger SBOM generation`` button is shown.
Clicking it schedules SBoM generation for all of them immediately. The popover
updates in real time, and completed SBoMs move from the **Not ready** section to

> the **Ready** section as they finish.

Reviewer: add hint that the view is updated in realtime, and no refresh is necessary

Operators
=========

How do I know if there is a problem generating an SBoM?
-------------------------------------------------------

If SBoM generation fails, check the **SBOM-Generator** section in the ODG
Dashboard sidebar. The logs show the status of each run, including errors,
warnings, and timestamps, making it straightforward to identify and diagnose
issues.

.. _sbom-supported-types:

> What OCM resource types and access types are supported?

Reviewer: there should be no resource type limitations in future versions, let's drop it from docs already

-------------------------------------------------------

Only OCM resources of artefact kind **Resource** are supported. Sources are
not scanned. The supported access types are ``ociRegistry``, ``localBlob/v1``,
and ``s3``. Resources with unsupported access types are skipped.

Developers
==========

How does the SBoM generation work under the hood?
-------------------------------------------------

When a backlog item is picked up for a given OCM component, the SBOM-Generator
resolves the component descriptor from the configured OCM repositories and
retrieves the matching ``Resource``. For each resource, it checks whether
the access type is supported (see :ref:`sbom-supported-types` above).

For supported resources, the generation proceeds according to the configured
mode:

- In **syft** mode, the Syft CLI binary is invoked via subprocess. For
  ``ociRegistry``, the image reference is passed directly to the CLI. For
  ``localBlob/v1``, the blob is downloaded to a temp file first. For ``s3``,
  the tar archive is downloaded and extracted to a temp directory before
  scanning.

> - In **BDBA** mode, the extension first verifies a valid BDBA secret exists for

Reviewer: let's not advertise the BDBA generation mode, as we intent to drop it again

================
SBOM-Generator
================

The SBOM-Generator extension generates Software Bill of Materials (SBoM)
documents for the OCM resources of your components. It processes backlog items,
resolves component descriptors from OCM repositories, and produces SBoM
documents in the configured format. Generated SBoMs are stored in the
delivery-service blob storage and can be downloaded directly from the ODG

> Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dashboard, or via API.
```

SBoM generation is supported in two modes:

- **Syft** scans artefacts directly using `Syft <https://github.com/anchore/syft>`_

> - **BDBA** retrieves or creates a `BDBA <https://www.blackduck.com>`_

Reviewer: I don't think we should be advertising this method as we want to get rid of it anyways. Let's drop the BDBA part from docs.

Open the ``DOWNLOAD SBOM`` popover for your component. Any sub-components whose
SBoM has not been generated yet will appear in the **Not ready** section. When
there are pending sub-components, a ``Trigger SBOM generation`` button is shown.
Clicking it schedules SBoM generation for all of them immediately. The popover
updates in real time, and completed SBoMs move from the **Not ready** section to
the **Ready** section as they finish.

Operators
=========

How do I know if there is a problem generating an SBoM?
-------------------------------------------------------

If SBoM generation fails, check the **SBOM-Generator** section in the ODG
Dashboard sidebar. The logs show the status of each run, including errors,
warnings, and timestamps, making it straightforward to identify and diagnose
issues.

.. _sbom-supported-types:

What OCM resource types and access types are supported?
-------------------------------------------------------

Only OCM resources of artefact kind **Resource** are supported. Sources are
not scanned. The supported combinations of access type and artefact type are:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Access Type

>      - Supported Artefact Types

Reviewer: we want to get rid of hardcoded artefact type support with https://github.com/open-component-model/open-delivery-gear/issues/81

to prevent outdated and wrong docs, let's not mention it here

   * - ``ociRegistry``
     - ``ociImage``, ``ociArtifact``
   * - ``localBlob/v1``
     - ``directoryTree``, ``executable``
   * - ``s3``
     - ``application/tar``, ``application/x-tar``

Developers
==========

How does the SBoM generation work under the hood?
-------------------------------------------------

When a backlog item is picked up for a given OCM component, the SBOM-Generator
resolves the component descriptor from the configured OCM repositories and

> retrieves the matching ``ResourceNode``. For each resource, it checks whether

Reviewer: `ResourceNode` is an ODG specific (internal) term. let's use the spec OCM equivalent -> `Resource`

================
SBOM-Generator
================

The SBOM-Generator extension generates Software Bill of Materials (SBoM)
documents for the OCM resources of your components. It uses
`Syft <https://github.com/anchore/syft>`_ to scan artefacts directly,

> and stores the generated SBoMs in the delivery-service blob storage. SBoMs can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and stores the generated SBoMs in the ODG blob storage. SBoMs can
```

be downloaded from the ODG Dashboard or via API.

How-to Guides
=============

Users
-----

How do I download SBoM documents for my product or its sub-components?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Add your product to the ODG Dashboard.

2. Open your product page.

3. To download the SBoM for your **product**, click the ``DOWNLOAD SBOM`` button.

   .. image:: ../res/download-sbom-button.svg
      :alt: Download SBOM button

   This opens the SBoM popover, where all sub-components are grouped into two
   sections: **Ready** and **Not ready**.

   .. image:: ../res/download-sbom-popover.svg
      :alt: Download SBOM Popover

   The popover also shows the configured output format, and displays the access
   type and artefact type for each sub-component.

   .. hint::
      The popover updates in real time. No manual refresh is needed.

4. To download the SBoM for a specific **sub-component**, open the sub-component
   first, then click the ``DOWNLOAD SBOM`` button.

How can I manually trigger SBoM generation for a component?

> """"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be on the same level as the "How do I download SBOM documents..." question?

     mappings:
       - prefix: ''                 # matches all components
         aws_secret_name: ~         # AWS secret name (required for S3 artefacts)

**Top-level options**

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 15 15 45
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Type
     - Default
     - Description
   * - ``enabled``
     - bool
     - ``true``
     - Enable or disable the extension.
   * - ``delivery_service_url``
     - string
     - —
     - URL of the delivery service instance.
   * - ``output_format``
     - string
     - ``cyclonedx``
     - Output format: ``cyclonedx`` or ``spdx``.
   * - ``interval``
     - int (seconds)
     - ``86400``
     - Maximum time before an artefact is re-scanned.
   * - ``mappings``
     - list
     - ``[]``
     - Per-prefix component mappings. See mapping fields below.

**Mapping fields** (each entry in ``mappings``)

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 15 15 45
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Type
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``prefix``
     - string
     - yes
     - Component name prefix. Use ``''`` to match all components.
   * - ``aws_secret_name``
     - string

>      - S3 artefacts

Reviewer 2: `S3 artefacts` is a rather unexpected value for me in the `Required` column 😄
